Traditional Exposure-Based Pricing Models

In the early days of web advertising (around late 1994 and early 1995), few websites
or advertisers understood the real value of the web as an advertising medium, let
alone what price to assign to web advertising. The advertising managers certainly
understood the value of a 30 s television spot or a classified ad in the back of the
book, due to factors including industry norms, program ratings, years of marketing
research, and managerial experience. But, except for a handful of pioneering online
programs like CDNOW’s BuyWeb, which produced measurable results, there was
simply no way to understand the value of web advertising [9]. This presented a
dilemma for those managers who wished to advertise online.


Performance-Based Pricing Models

The performance-based pricing has been the most prevalent pricing model since
2006. In 2013, approximately 65 % of the web advertising revenues were priced
on a performance basis [11]. The earliest performance-based pricing model in web
advertising is the cost-per-click pricing model.


Cost-Per-Click Pricing Model

Paying by the number of viewers (i.e., the CPM model) remained the norm until
Procter & Gamble negotiated a deal with Yahoo! in 1996 that compensated the
web portal for ads based on the “cost-per-click,” commonly known as “CPC” [4].
Yahoo! was paid only when a user clicked on the ad; this was the web-version of
paying for direct response commonly used by advertisers for things such as mail
and telephone solicitations. By 2002, the CPC model had been adopted by both
Google and Yahoo!, and it became the most widely used pricing model in paid
search advertising.

Outcome-Based Pricing Model

The advertisers are eventually interested in outcomes, and the ultimate outcome is
purchase. As Stephen Klein, former I/PRO manager, stated: “One hundred thousand
people going to a site is worth something, but a site that only five people visit can
be worth more if they are the right five people” [14]. The metrics discussed above
relates to early stages of the purchase process: Banner ads affect the consumer’s
awareness, and the action affects the consumer’s comprehension and understanding.
Beyond these initial stages are the marketing objectives of attitude change, purchase
intention, and, ultimately, purchase. An outcome-based pricing model begins by
specifying precisely the advertiser’s goal for the target communication.
